this video is made possible by audible
get a free audiobook from audible.com
slash real life floor Russia is huge the
country spans through eleven different
time zones across two different
continents and takes up about one-eighth
of all the land on earth despite all of
this though Russia has a critical
problem Russia is shrinking it's not
shrinking in land russia has plenty of
that instead russia's shrinking problem
is with her population which has been
nearly continuously going down for
nearly 30 years now when you're only
looking at the size of countries based
on how much land they have Russia
clearly wins that race but when you
factor in Russia's population of about
one hundred and forty four million
people Russia comes in as only the ninth
largest country in the world behind a
lot of other countries that are
significantly smaller in land like
Pakistan Nigeria and most interestingly
Bangladesh a country that is 118 times
smaller than Russia but has over 20
million more people living there an even
stranger case is the island of Java
inside of Indonesia Java is 123 times
smaller than Russia is but the islands
population of 141 million easily
compares with Russia's entire population
of 144 million and it didn't used to
always be this way
as recently as 1900 the territory of
modern Russia itself without factoring
in the rest of the Russian empires
population at the time had the third
highest population of any country in the
world only remaining behind Qing China
and British controlled India there were
more Russians at the time than there
were Americans but within a century all
of that had completely changed and the
biggest reason why it changed and the
reason why modern Russia is still
struggling so much with this problem is
largely because of the second world war
a war which absolutely devastated the
Soviet Union and Russia
specifically in just four years of war
between 1941 and 1945 the USSR lost a
mind-boggling 13.7 percent of her entire
population if we divide the USSR up into
its separate Republic's we can see that
Russia itself lost 12.7% of all of her
people more than one out of every four
people in Belarus died while Ukraine
Lithuania Latvia Armenia Kazakhstan
Azerbaijan Georgia Estonia and Moldova
also all took heavy losses along with
other Eastern European countries like
Poland the fact of the matter is is
Eastern Europe in general took a massive
population hit in only four years and
the scars that that war left upon
society here can still be felt today one
statistic that I'm reminded about that
is particularly haunting is the one
about males born inside of the Soviet
Union during 1923 if you were born a boy
anywhere inside of the USSR that year
then right at Birth you would only be
given a 20% chance of staying alive long
enough to see your 23rd birthday in 1946
80 percent of all boys born in the USSR
that year would be dead by the time of
January 1st 1946 just 23 years later if
we take a look at Russia's population
pyramid a chart which shows people
living inside of a country of all ages
you can see healthy growth at first and
then a massive gash during the years of
World War two in the years immediately
following the war the population began
to rebound but slowed down in the late
1960s this slowdown was the first echo
of the Second World War all those
millions of young people who died in the
1940s who didn't have any children of
their own meant that all of their
millions of unborn children weren't
alive to have their own
children twenty to twenty-five years
later by the time of the late 1960s
which caused population growth to slag
fast-forward another 20 to 25 years to
the early 1990s and you can see the
second echo of World War 2 where the
great-grandchildren of everybody who
died during the war would have been born
had they survived the echo of wars
effect on population at the time was
worsened by the fact that in 1991 the
USSR itself collapsed which through
Russia into deep economic and social
upheaval the birthrate plummeted
while the death rates soared Russia
experienced its first actual drop in
population since 1945 in 1992 the first
year after the Soviet Union's collapse
massive economic and social hardships
experienced in the chaos of that
collapse contributed to many people just
deciding not to have children or to
migrate away from the country and
combined with a second echo of the war
Russia's population continued to shrink
every single year from 1992 up until
2012 Russia began to grow again between
2013 and 2015 but then has shrunk more
every year from 2016 up to the present
some of this modern shrinkage can be
attributed to the second world wars
third echo on russian society which is
happening right now
the great-great-grandchildren the people
who died without children in the war
would normally be getting born right now
and since that's obviously not happening
it's having a marked effect but there
are other factors at work as well
another is that Russia is currently
experiencing more economic hardships in
2014 Russia annexed the Crimean
Peninsula a move which added over 2
million people into Russia's population
pool and which still wasn't enough to
boost Russia's population back to the
level seen in 1991 with several
sanctions passed against Russia by
several countries around the world as a
consequence of this annexation Russia
shrunk from the world's ninth largest
economy in 2014 a position equal to
Russia's rank in population down to the
world's 12th largest economy five years
later in 2019 with
via Canada and South Korea overtaking
her another problem that hasn't been
mentioned yet and that certainly plays a
factor is Russia's geography and the
fact that most of it is pretty
inhospitable in modern times 77 percent
of Russia's entire population or 110
million people live inside just the
European part of Russia where the
temperatures are more mild but this part
of Russia only accounts for 23 percent
of Russia's land the rest belongs to a
huge region called Siberia which is the
inverse of European Russia it accounts
for 77 percent of Russia's land but only
23 percent of Russia's population if
Siberia was an independent country it
would still be the largest country on
earth in size but it would have a
smaller population than California
Siberia is largely undeveloped and
extremely hostile to human habitation
with brutal and long winters with
absurdly cold temperatures because of
this most of Siberia is completely empty
without many human settlements and as a
result Russia doesn't really have as
much land that can be settled by people
as it may seem at first Bangladesh and
the island of Java may be over a hundred
times smaller than Russia in total land
but they arguably have more easily
settleable and rich agricultural land
than Russia does which in part helps to
explain why they have higher or similar
populations Russia's geography has in a
way always been one of the country's
greatest challenges to overcome and it
continues to be a massive hurdle for the
country to overcome in order to expand
her population when you combine all of
these factors together along with other
issues like a moderately low rate of
immigration in regards to Russia's size
and it begins to paint an overall
picture if the current shrinking
population trend continues up until 2050
Russia will find itself in a position
where she is only the 14th largest
country in the world far behind
countries like Nigeria Pakistan Ethiopia
Bangladesh the Philippines Mexico the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and
even Egypt those estimates are the
official estimates of the United Nations
though and they're far from the most
pessimistic other estimates by other
demographers believe that if the
population shrinkage returns to the same
levels that Russia experienced during
the 1990s the population could dwindle
down to as little as 110 million making
Russia about equal to what Iran will
probably look like at the same time in
terms of population numbers the next 30
years will almost certainly be an
interesting and decisive time for the
Russian nation understanding Russia is
complicated especially from an
outsider's perspective Winston Churchill
once said of Russia that it is a riddle
wrapped up in a mystery inside of an
enigma so if you really want to go into
some serious depth behind understanding
Russian history and civilization there's
no better book than a history of Russia
from Peter the Great to Gorbachev
written and narrated by Mark Steinberg
the entire audio book is offered on
audible and it's nearly 19 hours long
the book would usually cost 41 95 but
you can listen to all of it completely
for free at audible
honorable is a leading provider of
audiobooks and other spoken word
entertainment they have an unmatched
selection of great titles covering
everything from science fiction and
fantasy to history and business I really
love audiobooks because you can
essentially listen to and learn about
anything while you're doing anything if
you're stuck in a commute to work it can
become a great opportunity to listen to
your favorite book or subject and you
can actually begin to enjoy yourself
best of all though is that you can start
listening with a 30-day free trial and
choose to listen to any one book they
have for free it doesn't even have to be
about Russian history but if you're into
that hey
and you'll get to audible originals for
free too you just need to visit
audible.com slash real life lore or text
real life floor 2 5 0 0 - 5 0 0 and as
always thank you for watching